feat: Add a blog post about how Shorebird works (#90)
shorebirdtech/website: src/pages/blogs/how_shorebird_works.md

# How Shorebird Works

## Code Push

Code push, sometimes called “over the air updates”, is a way of updating
application code in production so that all your users are always running the

> latest code – just like how your web application works. Code push for Flutter is

Reviewer: ```suggestion
latest code – just like how a web application works. Code push for Flutter is
```

one of the top 50 most upvoted issues across all of GitHub. Code push solutions
have long been used by mobile developers to make app development more like web
development. Existing solutions have typically relied on WebViews or Lua
scripts, and require developers to use different languages and frameworks for

> different parts of their applications. Such solutions also implicitly require

Reviewer: ```suggestion
different parts of their applications. They also implicitly require
```

developers to be able to predict where they will have bugs in their code, since
only some parts of their applications are updatable and others not. At Shorebird
when we sat down to build Code Push for Flutter, we wanted to build something

> better.

Reviewer: I feel this paragraph is too long, maybe adding some line breaks?

I also noticed that `Code push` and `solution(s)`  word is used many times, I wonder if we could mix and match with alternative words for them

Author: Tried to remove some.

Shorebird’s code push for Flutter allows developers to update their Flutter apps
instantly, over the air, deploying fixes directly to end users’ devices. Our
solution takes < 5 minutes to integrate and requires no code changes.

> Shorebird’s code push can update any Dart code in your app. We’ve designed our

Reviewer: ```suggestion

Shorebird’s code push can update any Dart code in your app. We’ve designed our
```

Reviewer: Maybe we could also start this paragraph differently? It starts with the exact same words than the one before.

Author: I'm not seeing the duplication?

system to comply with Apple and Google store policies without sacrificing
performance (even after patching).

## How does code push work?

Shorebird’s code push starts by forking Flutter & Dart. We’ve made very few

> modifications to the Flutter tool, and Flutter engine, none to the Framework,

Reviewer: > none to the Framework,
I have been thinking about this. I haven't changed the framework itself, but we made a couple of specific changes to the flutter tool, I wonder if that would count as changes in the framework.

but have made significant changes to Dart. Essentially we built a custom Dart
toolchain and Dart runtime to make apps updatable in production.

Our Code Push consists of:

> 1. a command line program shorebird that knows how to wrap flutter, including

Reviewer: ```suggestion
1. A command line program shorebird that knows how to wrap flutter, including
```

performance-critical Dart code in a Flutter program is typically the Flutter
framework itself, and very few users ever change the Flutter framework, as long
as we’re able to integrate our interpreter well and execute unchanged code on
the CPU, essentially all of your application would end up running (at full
speed) on the CPU and your program as a whole would show unchanged performance.
This was our bet. Other than being extremely hard to make work, it paid off.

Determining what parts of your program we could run on the CPU vs. interpreter
was hard. To do this we invented a new phase of Dart compilation we called the
“linker”. The linker’s job is to analyze two (similar) Dart programs and find
the maximal similarity between them and then decide what would be necessary to
update in the first one in order to make it run like the second. We still have a
couple missing optimizations in this part of our system, but when it works well,
developers see 99% of their code run on the CPU (even for large changes).
Teaching the linker how to figure this out however required significant changes
to Dart’s compiler toolchain.

## Changes to Dart’s Toolchain

> We changed large swaths of Dart’s codebase, including:

Reviewer: Nit: `swaths` seems like an unusual word, maybe we should change it to a more approachable one? Special for non native speakers? (Like me, who had to google what this was haha)

---
layout: ../../layouts/MarkdownLayout.astro
title: Blog | How Shorebird Works
description: How Shorebird Code Push works
---

# How Shorebird Works

## Code Push

Code push, sometimes called "over the air updates", is a way of updating
application code in production so that all your users are always running the
latest code – just like how a web application works. [Code push for
Flutter](https://github.com/flutter/flutter/issues/14330) is one of the top 50

> most upvoted issues across all of GitHub. Code push has long been used by mobile

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
most requested features in the Flutter project. Code push has long been used by mobile
```

developers to make app development more like web development.

Existing code push solutions have typically relied on WebViews or Lua scripts,
and require developers to use different languages and frameworks for different
parts of their applications. These also implicitly require developers to be able
to predict where their code will have bugs, since only some parts of their

> applications are updatable and others not. At Shorebird when we sat down to

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
applications are updatable and others not. At Shorebird, when we sat down to
```

build Code Push for Flutter, we wanted to build something better.

Shorebird’s code push for Flutter allows developers to update their Flutter apps
instantly, over the air, deploying fixes directly to end users’ devices.
Shorebird takes < 5 minutes to integrate and requires no code changes. Our code
push can update any Dart code in your app. We’ve designed our system to comply
with Apple and Google store policies without sacrificing performance (even after
patching).

> ## How does code push work?

Reviewer: ```suggestion
## How we solved it
```

Shorebird’s code push starts by forking Flutter & Dart. We’ve made very few

> modifications to the Flutter tool and Flutter engine, none to the Framework,

Reviewer 2: I'm not sure the average reader will understand the difference between the tool, the engine, and the framework, even if they're a relatively experienced Flutter dev

Author: Fixed.

but have made significant changes to Dart. Essentially we built a custom Dart
toolchain and Dart runtime to make apps updatable in production.

> Our Code Push consists of:

Reviewer 2: Inconsistent capitalization of "code push"

Author: Fixed to always be "code push"

1. A command line program `shorebird` that knows how to wrap `flutter`,
   including pulling down its own fork of Flutter’s engine.
2. A fork of Flutter’s engine that includes our custom updater, a library we
   built to manage patches in your application.
3. A cloud service at shorebird.dev to store information about your releases
   (builds you send to the stores) and patches (changes you make to releases via
   Shorebird), control rollout, see analytics, etc.

> 4. And finally fork of the Dart compiler toolchain, which makes it possible to

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
4. And finally, a fork of the Dart compiler toolchain, which makes it possible to
```

Author: Fixed.

   construct and run these "patches" to your application.

The command line and cloud service are already covered in our
[architecture](https://docs.shorebird.dev/architecture/) documentation. But
recently we’ve received a bunch of questions about how our Dart modifications
work, so I’m going to cover those here.

## Dart

Dart has a "hot reload" feature used commonly during Flutter development. This
uses Dart’s "just-in-time" (JIT) compiler. A JIT compiler is a way of turning
source code into machine code right before the computer executes it. It’s the

> way that JavaScript, JavaScript, Lua and many other languages typically work.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
way that JavaScript, Lua, and many other languages typically work.
```

> Shorebird does not use Dart’s JIT, rather a customer interpreter we built. An

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Shorebird does not use Dart’s JIT. Instead, we use a customer interpreter we built. An
```

[interpreter](<https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Interpreter_(computing)>) is code
that is used to execute logic from source code directly, without "compiling" it
(translating it to machine code). This is important in the context of updates,
because use of an interpreter is required by [Apple’s developer
agreement](https://developer.apple.com/support/terms/apple-developer-program-license-agreement/#b331)
when updating applications. Dart did not have a production-ready interpreter,
but was designed in such a way that adding one was possible, so we did.

> Just-in-time systems have several nice properties. One is flexibility – a JIT’d

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Just-in-time (JIT) systems have several nice properties. One is flexibility – a JIT’d
```

language like JavaScript can run source code it’s never seen before in
production. Another is that a JIT can be very good at "peak performance", since

> a JIT runtime includes a compiler (something to turn source code into machine
> code) during production, which means a sophisticated JIT can run some code,

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
a JIT runtime includes a compiler during production, which means a sophisticated JIT can run some code,
```

Already explained above

measure that it’s being run very often and then go back and compile the same
code in a more optimized way (with different tradeoffs) to make it run faster (a

> type of "profile guided optimization"). In an "ahead of time" (AOT) compiled

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
type of "profile guided optimization"). In an ahead-of-time (AOT) compiled
```

For consistency

> language (like Swift) the source code is only used on the developer’s machine to

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
language (like Swift), the source code is only used on the developer’s machine to
```

produce the "machine code" which will end up running on the user’s device. AOT
solutions have the nice advantage of not including a compiler in production

> (smaller binary size) as well as having faster startup because there is no work

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
(which yields a smaller binary size) as well as having faster startup because there is no work
```

to do when starting the app. At the tradeoff of some amount of peak performance
as well as flexibility.

Dart is an atypical language in that it has both JIT and AOT compiler workflows.
Dart was designed originally as a JIT’d language, but is now most commonly used
(as part of Flutter) with an AOT workflow. `flutter run –debug` uses Dart’s JIT
mode, but `flutter build ipa` uses Dart’s AOT mode. Another side-effect of being
a JIT is that typically much more information about the source code is kept
around during production. This extra information is part of what enables a JIT
to optimize hot functions, it’s also exactly the kind of information that has
enabled what Shorebird has done.

Functions within a JIT runtime need to be aware they could have different
compiled representations (e.g. one simple compile and one later optimized
compile for the same function). Shorebird takes advantage of this quirk of

> Dart’s architecture, to insert a new interpreter, as an alternative mechanism

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Dart’s architecture to insert a new interpreter as an alternative mechanism
```

for a function to use to execute. This allows us to effectively replace parts of
your application at runtime without needing to compile new code on the device.

## An interpreter for Dart

Adding an interpreter to Dart was a challenge (working on compilers is hard, if
you like compilers, we’re [hiring](https://shorebird.dev/jobs/)), and took us
most of the last year. We didn’t try to build a particularly fancy interpreter
for Dart (that had been attempted at Google multiple times before), but rather
built something very simple. One of the challenges this creates is that

> Interpreters (and particularly our simple one) are very slow. In our case, our

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
interpreters (and particularly our simple one) are very slow. In our case, our
```

current (unoptimized) interpreter is about 100x slower than executing Dart AOT

> code on a CPU. Thankfully we had an insight early on that made us not have to

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
code on a CPU. Thankfully, we had an insight early on that made us not have to
```

care about interpreter speed.

> 
> The insight that makes Shorebird possible is building a system that runs only
> changed Dart logic on the interpreter. Since the vast majority of the

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion

This insight is that we can run only changed Dart logic on the interpreter, while continuing to run unchanged code on the CPU. Since the vast majority of the
```

> performance-critical Dart code in a Flutter program is typically the Flutter
> framework itself, and very few users ever change the Flutter framework, as long
> as we’re able to integrate our interpreter well and execute unchanged code on
> the CPU, essentially all of your application would end up running (at full
> speed) on the CPU and your program as a whole would show unchanged performance.
> This was our bet. Other than being extremely hard to make work, it paid off.
> 

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
performance-critical Dart code in a Flutter program is typically the Flutter
framework itself, essentially all of your application would end up running (at full
speed) on the CPU, and your program as a whole would show unchanged performance.
This was our bet. Other than being extremely hard to make work, it paid off.

```

Just trying to shorten this sentence a bit

Determining what parts of your program we could run on the CPU vs. interpreter
was hard. To do this we invented a new phase of Dart compilation we called the
"linker". The linker’s job is to analyze two (similar) Dart programs and find
the maximal similarity between them and then decide what would be necessary to
update in the first one in order to make it run like the second. We still have a
[couple missing
optimizations](https://github.com/shorebirdtech/shorebird/issues/1892) in this
part of our system, but when it works well, developers see 99% of their code run
on the CPU (even for large changes). Teaching the linker how to figure this out
however required significant changes to Dart’s compiler toolchain.

## Changes to Dart’s Toolchain

We made many changes to Dart, including:

1. Runtime changes to add our interpreter.
2. Compiler changes teach the Dart compiler how to compile a program maximally
   similar to a previous version of the same program.
3. A new linker which can compare parts two versions of an app and decide if and
   how they’ve changed.

> And much more -- too many to go through here, but I’ll give one example of a

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
And much more – too many to go through here, but I’ll give one example of a
```

Author: I expect the markdown renderer will do that for us?

problem we recently solved.

## Optimizing Dart’s constant pool

> In programming languages it’s typically to have "constants" which are variables
> that don’t change at runtime. These are often pre-computed during compile time,

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
In programming languages, it’s typical to have "constants" which are variables
that don’t change at runtime. These are often pre-computed during compile time,
```

> saved in a common space and shared throughout the program. E.g. if you have the

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
saved in a common space and shared throughout the program. E.g., if you have the
```

Author: Does e.g. typically have a comma after it?

Reviewer 2: According to the AP style guide

Author: 🤯

string "hello" in your program many times, most compilers will only allocate a
single string "hello" and share it throughout your program.

> The way this works in Dart, is via something Dart calls the "Object Pool" (aka a

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Dart implements this using something called the "Object Pool" (aka a
```

constant pool). In Dart’s JIT mode, each function ends up with its own Object
Pool to hold constant references used within that function (e.g. strings,

> integers). In Dart’s AOT mode it combines all of these "Object Pools" into one

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
integers). Dart’s AOT combines all of these "Object Pools" into one
```

global object pool and updates all parts of your program accordingly to
reference slots in this global object pool. So why does this matter? This
matters because when we’re trying to update your program if the new version of
your code uses new constants (a very common occurrence), those new constants
also need a slot in this pool. Worse is that if we add this slot in the middle
of the pool, all of the references into the latter half of the pool would break.
If we’re trying to end up running code on the CPU, we have to be very careful
never to change things that the pre-compiled code makes reference to.

For example:

```dart
void main() {
print("a");
print("z");
}
```

The dart compiler would produce an object pool:

```
0 : "a"
1 : "z"
```

If we then change that to be:

```dart
void main() {
print("a");
print("b");
print("c");
}
```

Dart object pool would be:

```
0: "a"
1: "b"

> 2: "z"

Reviewer: Should this be `c`?

Author: Fixed.

```

Notice that that index for "z" has changed! That means that all parts of your
program that reference "z" are now changed and thus we can’t use the previously
compiled (fast) version of this function, and have to run this logic in our
interpreter.

We solved this by teaching the Dart compiler how to construct order-dependent
structures (there are many of these) like the Object Pool in a stable ordered
fashion. Importantly we taught Dart that sometimes when it’s processing a
"patch", it should assign these indices in the Object Pool (and similar data
structures) to be maximally similar to how they were assigned in the provided
"base" release.

As noted above, we had to make many more changes to Dart in order to make it
work well for code push, but those we’ll have to save for another article.

## Conclusion

> In conclusion, we made a lot of (difficult) changes to Dart, so you don’t have

Reviewer: ```suggestion
We made a lot of (difficult) changes to Dart, so you don’t have
```

---
layout: ../../layouts/MarkdownLayout.astro
title: Blog | How Shorebird Works

> description: How Shorebird Code Push works

Reviewer 3: Might be good to make this more detailed so it isn't so similar to the title.
